.TH ELOQUENCE 1 "February 2026" "eloquence 6.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
eloquence \- Eloquence V6.1 text\-to\-speech synthesizer
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B eloquence
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B eloquence
synthesizes speech from text using the ETI Eloquence V6.1 engine
running under QEMU ARM user\-mode emulation.
Text can be provided via command\-line argument, file, or standard input.
Output is written as a WAV file.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-t ", " \-\-text " " \fITEXT\fR
Text to synthesize.
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-file " " \fIFILE\fR
Read text from FILE.
.TP
.BR \-o ", " \-\-output " " \fIFILE\fR
Output WAV file (default: output.wav).
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-voice " " \fINUM\fR
Voice preset 0\-7 (default: 0).
The voices are: 0=Reed, 1=Shelley, 2=Bobby, 3=Rocko,
4=Glen, 5=Sandy, 6=Grandma, 7=Grandpa.
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-speed " " \fINUM\fR
Speech speed 0\-250 (default: 50).
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-pitch " " \fINUM\fR
Pitch baseline 0\-100 (default: 65).
.TP
.BR \-\-rate " " \fINUM\fR
Sample rate index: 0=8kHz, 1=11kHz, 2=22kHz (default: 1).
.TP
.BR \-\-list\-voices
Show available voices with their default parameters.
.TP
.BR \-\-version
Show ECI library version string.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show help message.
.SH SETUP
After installing the package, run
.B sudo eloquence\-setup
to download the proprietary Eloquence ARM libraries and configure the
ARM sysroot.  This requires an internet connection and approximately
100MB of disk space.
.PP
To remove the downloaded data:
.B sudo eloquence\-setup \-\-uninstall
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B ECI_BRIDGE_DIR
Override the directory containing the eci\-bridge binary and sysroot.
Useful for development or non\-standard installations.
.TP
.B ECI_BRIDGE_SOCKET
Override the Unix domain socket path used for bridge communication.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /usr/share/eloquence/eci\-bridge
ARM bridge daemon binary (runs under qemu\-arm).
.TP
.I /usr/share/eloquence/sysroot/
ARM sysroot with Eloquence libraries (created by eloquence\-setup).
.TP
.I /usr/lib/x86_64\-linux\-gnu/libeci.so
Native shim library implementing the ECI API.
.TP
.I /usr/lib/speech\-dispatcher\-modules/sd_eloquence
Speech\-dispatcher output module.
.TP
.I /etc/speech\-dispatcher/modules/eloquence.conf
Speech\-dispatcher module configuration.
.SH EXAMPLES
Synthesize text to a WAV file:
.PP
.nf
eloquence \-t "Hello world" \-o hello.wav
.fi
.PP
Use a different voice and speed:
.PP
.nf
eloquence \-t "Fast speech" \-v 3 \-s 150 \-o fast.wav
.fi
.PP
Read from a file:
.PP
.nf
eloquence \-f document.txt \-o document.wav
.fi
.PP
Read from stdin:
.PP
.nf
echo "Hello" | eloquence \-o hello.wav
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR eloquence\-setup (1),
.BR speech\-dispatcher (1),
.BR spd\-say (1),
.BR qemu\-arm (1)
